# Summary
This repository contains a Python prototype of an RT code simulating single scattering of monochromatic sunlight at the limb. Prototype means the code is not optimised numerically (e.g., it is in Python), twilight solar-view geometry is omitted, aerosol scenario is not yet included, comments in the functions are not yet thorough or could be inaccurate.  

Optical parameters of shells, constituting the atmosphere, change along the radius, `r` (km). Extinction and scattering coefficients change along `r` linearly: `ext = a + b * r`, where `a` and `b` are constant within each shell (optical layer). The code was tested vs. all pure and absorbing Rayleigh scenarios from Zawada et al., *Systematic comparison of vectorial spherical radiative transfer models in limb scattering geometry*, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 14, 3953–3972, 2021 (doi: https://doi.org/10.5194/amt-14-3953-2021). Note, the paper also ignores the twilight condition. 

# Instructions
1. The GitHub repository (assumed cloned to local machine) contains 9 Python source files, one function per file, and 2 folders. The `tests` folder is discussed below, at step #6. The `ort_limb_benchmarks` folder contains input for the benchmarks (the word 'input' should have been added to the folder name...). This data was extracted from Zawada’s NetCDF file and placed into respective txt files for a) convenience – one does not have to read their NetCDF, and b) better data visibility – i.e., the sequence of the solar geometry in their NetCDF differs from that published in the paper.

2. In `main_limbss.py`, line 29, `path_bmrk = "./ort_limb_benchmarks/"` – this relative path should work as is, otherwise update as necessary.

3. Also, in the `main_limbss.py`:  
3.1 Line 13: `npnts_int = 1` – number of internal (auxiliary) shells between the main shells; `npnts_int = 0, 1, 2` were tried;  
3.2 Lines 16-22: 0-offset indices. Only `isolar`, `iwavelength`, and `icomposition` have effect to select different solar geometry, wavelength, and pure Rayleigh or Rayleigh + ozone case. Other indices are used only to create a unique output file name (see below) and quickly locate corresponding data in the NetCDF benchmark file.

4. Line 24: `itp_plot = 30` - 0-offset index corresponding to tangent height at which solution will be printed on screen (for 1 point; all points go to a 'txt' file when finished). Due to Zawada’s input, its value is close to the actual tangent height, i.e. index 30 corresponds to 30.5 km

5. By default, one should get the following on the screen (almost immediately):
```
Rayleigh OT, ozone OT, SSA:  
300.0 nm: 1.2002  2.9165   0.2915
315.0 nm: 0.9747  0.3392   0.7418
351.0 nm: 0.6167  0.0010   0.9984
435.0 nm: 0.2522  0.0007   0.9973
442.0 nm: 0.2361  0.0014   0.9942
525.0 nm: 0.1165  0.0176   0.8690
600.0 nm: 0.0676  0.0419   0.6176
675.0 nm: 0.0419  0.0121   0.7759
943.0 nm: 0.0109  0.0000   1.0000
1020.0 nm: 0.0079  0.0000   1.0000
1700.0 nm: 0.0010  0.0000   1.0000

Echo input:  
sza = 70.0  saa = 30.0
wavelength = 351.0
rayleigh x-section =  2.87884699e-26
ozone x-section =  1.22579807e-22
abs_on_off =  0.0
number of TPs:  80
```
and in about 10 seconds
```
Iss = 3.989245e-02 at hkm_tp =  30.5 km
Iss[half:] = 2.250422e-02 at hkm_tp =  30.5 km
total elapsed time:  10.764 s
```
The thing that is printed immediately is the echo of the input (hence the fast printing). Later appears the solution at the requested one tangent height, wavelength, atmospheric composition (absorption = on/off), and solar geometry (30.5km, 351nm, no absorption, sza = 70, saa = 30 is the default setup).

In the same directory with `main_limbss.py`, a new txt file will be generated: `Iss_imod0_itst0_isol0_icom0_ialb0_iwav2_istk0.txt`. It contains solution for all 80 tangent heights. The file name shows indices (see #3 above) making it easy to find the corresponding solution in Zawada’s NetCDF file (yet one does not have to do it - see #6 next).  

6. The folder `tests` contains already extracted data for 4 cases (slides 2 and 3 in the presentation in `doc`). The 4 'txt' files are outputs (like in the mentioned `Iss_imod0_itst0_isol0_icom0_ialb0_iwav2_istk0.txt`). The Excel files contain benchmark data (column DZ) and results generated by `limbss` for 0, 1, and 2 auxiliary points (relative deviation is calculated and plotted there too). Specifically, for the default setup in the main py-file, one gets Iss = 3.989245e-02 at hkm_tp =  30.5 km and Zawada gives in `tst_imod0_itst0_isol0_icom0_ialb0_iwav2_istk0.xls`: column DZ, line 32, value = 0.039848 or 0.11 % error (a "funny thing": 0 auxiliary points is *more* accurate – 0.06% in this particular case !)  

7. `Iss[half:] = 2.250422e-02` at `hkm_tp =  30.5` (km) – this is left over from the developer's tests: this number corresponds to integration along the nearest half of the LOS. In many cases, it is inaccurate. Just ignore it.

8. Yet another thing tested was how the source function (includes attenuation of the solar beam) and transmittances, respectively `Tsol = exp(-tau_sol)` and `Tlos = exp(-tau_los)`, look like as a function of 's' – location on the LOS ('s = 0' is the tangent point, 's > 0' – towards the sensor). Currently, `limbss(…)` returns these values (lines 105-106) for testing, but the final code may or may not retain these. Slide 15 of ppt in `doc` shows the figures for the default setup in `main_limbss.py`. Note the images are not saved as files, but displayed in the Python IDE Spyder. Optionally, in line 156, replace plt.show() with plt.savefig(fname_Iss+“.jpg", dpi=300, bbox_inches="tight") to save the image into a file with the same name as the 'txt' (`fname_Iss` is defined in the code).

9. Lastly, for histograms (all non-aerosol SS tests, slide 18 in the 'doc' presentation), a separate main py file was created (not provided for simplicity).

# Code Structure (LOC & Tree)
```
limbss (86)                        # Main function calculating single scattering at the limb
     |
     +-refine_rgrid (35)           # Constructs refined grid of radii, r, with equidistant subdivision of optical layers and returns layer-membership mask.
     |
     +-getix (14)                  # Returns indices ixlo, ixhi of an interval x[ixlo]:x[ixhi] containing x0.
     |
     +-xy_los_shell (24)           # Returns coordinates of points where LOS intersects with the shells
     |            |
     |            +-getix
     |
     +-xyz_sol_shell (35)          # Compute the intersection of a solar beam with a sphere
     |
     +-tau_segment (20)            # Analytically calculates optical thickness of a segment assuming ext = a + b*r
     |           |
     |           +-antideriv (11)  # Computes integral{r(s) ds}, a.k.a. antiderivative of r(s), in closed form
     |
     +-simpson (Python function)
```
LOC = 86 + 35 + 14 + 24 + 35 + 20 + 11 = 225  
-EOF-
